SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-021-00592-x REVIEW ARTICLE Machine Learning: Algorithms, Real‑World Applications and Research Directions Iqbal H. Sarker1,2 Received: 27 January 2021 / Accepted: 12 March 2021 / Published online: 22 March 2021 © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd 2021 Abstract In the current age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR or Industry 4.0), the digital world has a wealth of data, such as Internet of Things (IoT) data, cybersecurity data, mobile data, business data, social media data, health data, etc. To intel- ligently analyze these data and develop the corresponding smart and automated applications, the knowledge of artificial intelligence (AI), particularly, machine learning (ML) is the key. Various types of machine learning algorithms such as supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, and reinforcement learning exist in the area. Besides, the deep learning, which is part of a broader family of machine learning methods, can intelligently analyze the data on a large scale. In this paper, we present a comprehensive view on these machine learning algorithms that can be applied to enhance the intelligence and the capabilities of an application. Thus, this study’s key contribution is explaining the principles of different machine learning techniques and their applicability in various real-world application domains, such as cybersecurity systems, smart cities, healthcare, e-commerce, agriculture, and many more. We also highlight the challenges and potential research directions based on our study. Overall, this paper aims to serve as a reference point for both academia and industry professionals as well as for decision-makers in various real-world situations and application areas, particularly from the technical point of view. Keywords Machine learning · Deep learning · Artificial intelligence · Data science · Data-driven decision-making · Predictive analytics · Intelligent applications Introduction be structured, semi-structured, or unstructured, discussed briefly in Sect. “Types of Real-World Data and Machine We live in the age of data, where everything around us is Learning Techniques”, which is increasing day-by-day. connected to a data source, and everything in our lives is Extracting insights from these data can be used to build digitally recorded [21, 103]. For instance, the current elec- various intelligent applications in the relevant domains. For tronic world has a wealth of various kinds of data, such as instance, to build a data-driven automated and intelligent the Internet of Things (IoT) data, cybersecurity data, smart cybersecurity system, the relevant cybersecurity data can city data, business data, smartphone data, social media data, be used [105]; to build personalized context-aware smart health data, COVID-19 data, and many more. The data can mobile applications, the relevant mobile data can be used [103], and so on. Thus, the data management tools and tech- niques having the capability of extracting insights or useful This article is part of the topical collection “Advances in knowledge from the data in a timely and intelligent way is Computational Approaches for Artificial Intelligence, Image Processing, IoT and Cloud Applications” guest edited by Bhanu urgently needed, on which the real-world applications are Prakash K N and M. Shivakumar. based. Artificial intelligence (AI), particularly, machine learning * Iqbal H. Sarker (ML) have grown rapidly in recent years in the context of msarker@swin.edu.au data analysis and computing that typically allows the appli- 1 Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, cations to function in an intelligent manner [95]. ML usually Australia provides systems with the ability to learn and enhance from 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, experience automatically without being specifically pro- Chittagong University of Engineering & Technology, grammed and is generally referred to as the most popular 4349 Chattogram, Bangladesh SN Computer Science Vol.:(0123456789)
160 Page 2 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 latest technologies in the fourth industrial revolution (4IR a particular domain is challenging. The reason is that the or Industry 4.0) [103, 105]. “Industry 4.0” [114] is typically purpose of different learning algorithms is different, even the ongoing automation of conventional manufacturing and the outcome of different learning algorithms in a similar industrial practices, including exploratory data processing, category may vary depending on the data characteristics using new smart technologies such as machine learning [106]. Thus, it is important to understand the principles automation. Thus, to intelligently analyze these data and to of various machine learning algorithms and their appli- develop the corresponding real-world applications, machine cability to apply in various real-world application areas, learning algorithms is the key. The learning algorithms can such as IoT systems, cybersecurity services, business and be categorized into four major types, such as supervised, recommendation systems, smart cities, healthcare and unsupervised, semi-supervised, and reinforcement learn- COVID-19, context-aware systems, sustainable agricul- ing in the area [75], discussed briefly in Sect. “Types of ture, and many more that are explained briefly in Sect. Real-World Data and MachineLearning Techniques”. The “Applications of Machine Learning”. popularity of these approaches to learning is increasing Based on the importance and potentiality of “Machine day-by-day, which is shown in Fig. 1, based on data col- Learning” to analyze the data mentioned above, in this lected from Google Trends [4] over the last five years. The paper, we provide a comprehensive view on various types x-axis of the figure indicates the specific dates and the cor- of machine learning algorithms that can be applied to responding popularity score within the range of 0(minimum) enhance the intelligence and the capabilities of an appli- to 100(maximum) has been shown in y-axis. According to cation. Thus, the key contribution of this study is explain- Fig. 1, the popularity indication values for these learning ing the principles and potentiality of different machine types are low in 2015 and are increasing day by day. These learning techniques, and their applicability in various real- statistics motivate us to study on machine learning in this world application areas mentioned earlier. The purpose paper, which can play an important role in the real-world of this paper is, therefore, to provide a basic guide for through Industry 4.0 automation. those academia and industry people who want to study, In general, the effectiveness and the efficiency of a research, and develop data-driven automated and intelli- machine learning solution depend on the nature and char- gent systems in the relevant areas based on machine learn- acteristics of data and the performance of the learning ing techniques. algorithms. In the area of machine learning algorithms, The key contributions of this paper are listed as follows: classification analysis, regression, data clustering, fea- ture engineering and dimensionality reduction, associa- – To define the scope of our study by taking into account tion rule learning, or reinforcement learning techniques the nature and characteristics of various types of real- exist to effectively build data-driven systems [41, 125]. world data and the capabilities of various learning tech- Besides, deep learning originated from the artificial niques. neural network that can be used to intelligently analyze – To provide a comprehensive view on machine learning data, which is known as part of a wider family of machine algorithms that can be applied to enhance the intelligence learning approaches [96]. Thus, selecting a proper learn- and capabilities of a data-driven application. ing algorithm that is suitable for the target application in Fig. 1 The worldwide popularity score of various types of ML algorithms (supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, and reinforcement) in a range of 0 (min) to 100 (max) over time where x-axis represents the timestamp information and y-axis represents the corresponding score SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 3 of 21 160 – To discuss the applicability of machine learning-based other types of business documents can be considered as solutions in various real-world application domains. unstructured data. – To highlight and summarize the potential research direc- – Semi-structured: Semi-structured data are not stored in tions within the scope of our study for intelligent data a relational database like the structured data mentioned analysis and services. above, but it does have certain organizational proper- ties that make it easier to analyze. HTML, XML, JSON The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next sec- documents, NoSQL databases, etc., are some examples tion presents the types of data and machine learning algo- of semi-structured data. rithms in a broader sense and defines the scope of our study. – Metadata: It is not the normal form of data, but “data We briefly discuss and explain different machine learning about data”. The primary difference between “data” and algorithms in the subsequent section followed by which “metadata” is that data are simply the material that can various real-world application areas based on machine classify, measure, or even document something relative learning algorithms are discussed and summarized. In the to an organization’s data properties. On the other hand, penultimate section, we highlight several research issues and metadata describes the relevant data information, giving potential future directions, and the final section concludes it more significance for data users. A basic example of a this paper. document’s metadata might be the author, file size, date generated by the document, keywords to define the docu- ment, etc. Types of Real‑World Data and Machine Learning Techniques In the area of machine learning and data science, research- ers use various widely used datasets for different purposes. These are, for example, cybersecurity datasets such as Machine learning algorithms typically consume and process NSL-KDD [119], UNSW-NB15 [76], ISCX’12 [1], CIC- data to learn the related patterns about individuals, business DDoS2019 [2], Bot-IoT [59], etc., smartphone datasets such processes, transactions, events, and so on. In the following, as phone call logs [84, 101], SMS Log [29], mobile applica- we discuss various types of real-world data as well as cat- tion usages logs [137] [117], mobile phone notification logs egories of machine learning algorithms. [73] etc., IoT data [16, 57, 62], agriculture and e-commerce data [120, 138], health data such as heart disease [92], dia- Types of Real‑World Data betes mellitus [83, 134], COVID-19 [43, 74], etc., and many more in various application domains. The data can be in dif- Usually, the availability of data is considered as the key to ferent types discussed above, which may vary from applica- construct a machine learning model or data-driven real- tion to application in the real world. To analyze such data in world systems [103, 105]. Data can be of various forms, a particular problem domain, and to extract the insights or such as structured, semi-structured, or unstructured [41, 72]. useful knowledge from the data for building the real-world Besides, the “metadata” is another type that typically repre- intelligent applications, different types of machine learning sents data about the data. In the following, we briefly discuss techniques can be used according to their learning capabili- these types of data. ties, which is discussed in the following. – Structured: It has a well-defined structure, conforms to Types of Machine Learning Techniques a data model following a standard order, which is highly organized and easily accessed, and used by an entity or a Machine Learning algorithms are mainly divided into four computer program. In well-defined schemes, such as rela- categories: Supervised learning, Unsupervised learning, tional databases, structured data are typically stored, i.e., Semi-supervised learning, and Reinforcement learning [75], in a tabular format. For instance, names, dates, addresses, as shown in Fig. 2. In the following, we briefly discuss each credit card numbers, stock information, geolocation, etc. type of learning technique with the scope of their applicabil- are examples of structured data. ity to solve real-world problems. – Unstructured: On the other hand, there is no pre-defined format or organization for unstructured data, making it – Supervised: Supervised learning is typically the task of much more difficult to capture, process, and analyze, machine learning to learn a function that maps an input mostly containing text and multimedia material. For to an output based on sample input-output pairs [41]. It example, sensor data, emails, blog entries, wikis, and uses labeled training data and a collection of training word processing documents, PDF files, audio files, examples to infer a function. Supervised learning is car- videos, images, presentations, web pages, and many ried out when certain goals are identified to be accom- SN Computer Science
160 Page 4 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Fig. 2 Various types of machine learning techniques plished from a certain set of inputs [105], i.e., a task- – Reinforcement: Reinforcement learning is a type of driven approach. The most common supervised tasks are machine learning algorithm that enables software “classification” that separates the data, and “regression” agents and machines to automatically evaluate the opti- that fits the data. For instance, predicting the class label mal behavior in a particular context or environment to or sentiment of a piece of text, like a tweet or a product improve its efficiency [52], i.e., an environment-driven review, i.e., text classification, is an example of super- approach. This type of learning is based on reward or vised learning. penalty, and its ultimate goal is to use insights obtained – Unsupervised: Unsupervised learning analyzes unla- from environmental activists to take action to increase beled datasets without the need for human interference, the reward or minimize the risk [75]. It is a powerful tool i.e., a data-driven process [41]. This is widely used for for training AI models that can help increase automation extracting generative features, identifying meaningful or optimize the operational efficiency of sophisticated trends and structures, groupings in results, and explora- systems such as robotics, autonomous driving tasks, tory purposes. The most common unsupervised learning manufacturing and supply chain logistics, however, not tasks are clustering, density estimation, feature learn- preferable to use it for solving the basic or straightfor- ing, dimensionality reduction, finding association rules, ward problems. anomaly detection, etc. – Semi-supervised: Semi-supervised learning can be Thus, to build effective models in various application areas defined as a hybridization of the above-mentioned different types of machine learning techniques can play supervised and unsupervised methods, as it operates a significant role according to their learning capabilities, on both labeled and unlabeled data [41, 105]. Thus, it depending on the nature of the data discussed earlier, and the falls between learning “without supervision” and learn- target outcome. In Table 1, we summarize various types of ing “with supervision”. In the real world, labeled data machine learning techniques with examples. In the follow- could be rare in several contexts, and unlabeled data are ing, we provide a comprehensive view of machine learning numerous, where semi-supervised learning is useful [75]. algorithms that can be applied to enhance the intelligence The ultimate goal of a semi-supervised learning model and capabilities of a data-driven application. is to provide a better outcome for prediction than that produced using the labeled data alone from the model. Some application areas where semi-supervised learning is used include machine translation, fraud detection, labe- ling data and text classification. Table 1 Various types of machine learning techniques with examples Learning type Model building Examples Supervised Algorithms or models learn from labeled data (task-driven approach) Classification, regression Unsupervised Algorithms or models learn from unlabeled data (Data-Driven Approach) Clustering, associa- tions, dimensionality reduction Semi-supervised Models are built using combined data (labeled + unlabeled) Classification, clustering Reinforcement Models are based on reward or penalty (environment-driven approach) Classification, control SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 5 of 21 160 Machine Learning Tasks and Algorithms labels [41]. The multiclass classification does not have the principle of normal and abnormal outcomes, unlike In this section, we discuss various machine learning algo- binary classification tasks. Instead, within a range of rithms that include classification analysis, regression specified classes, examples are classified as belonging analysis, data clustering, association rule learning, feature to one. For example, it can be a multiclass classification engineering for dimensionality reduction, as well as deep task to classify various types of network attacks in the learning methods. A general structure of a machine learning- NSL-KDD [119] dataset, where the attack categories based predictive model has been shown in Fig. 3, where are classified into four class labels, such as DoS (Denial the model is trained from historical data in phase 1 and the of Service Attack), U2R (User to Root Attack), R2L outcome is generated in phase 2 for the new test data. (Root to Local Attack), and Probing Attack. • Multi-label classification: In machine learning, multi- Classification Analysis label classification is an important consideration where an example is associated with several classes or labels. Classification is regarded as a supervised learning method Thus, it is a generalization of multiclass classification, in machine learning, referring to a problem of predictive where the classes involved in the problem are hierar- modeling as well, where a class label is predicted for a given chically structured, and each example may simultane- example [41]. Mathematically, it maps a function (f) from ously belong to more than one class in each hierarchical input variables (X) to output variables (Y) as target, label or level, e.g., multi-level text classification. For instance, categories. To predict the class of given data points, it can be Google news can be presented under the categories of a carried out on structured or unstructured data. For example, “city name”, “technology”, or “latest news”, etc. Multi- spam detection such as “spam” and “not spam” in email label classification includes advanced machine learn- service providers can be a classification problem. In the fol- ing algorithms that support predicting various mutually lowing, we summarize the common classification problems. non-exclusive classes or labels, unlike traditional clas- sification tasks where class labels are mutually exclu- • Binary classification: It refers to the classification tasks sive [82]. having two class labels such as “true and false” or “yes and no” [41]. In such binary classification tasks, one Many classification algorithms have been proposed in the class could be the normal state, while the abnormal machine learning and data science literature [41, 125]. In state could be another class. For instance, “cancer not the following, we summarize the most common and popular detected” is the normal state of a task that involves a methods that are used widely in various application areas. medical test, and “cancer detected” could be considered as the abnormal state. Similarly, “spam” and “not spam” – Naive Bayes (NB): The naive Bayes algorithm is based in the above example of email service providers are con- on the Bayes’ theorem with the assumption of independ- sidered as binary classification. ence between each pair of features [51]. It works well and • Multiclass classification: Traditionally, this refers to can be used for both binary and multi-class categories those classification tasks having more than two class in many real-world situations, such as document or text classification, spam filtering, etc. To effectively classify the noisy instances in the data and to construct a robust prediction model, the NB classifier can be used [94]. The key benefit is that, compared to more sophisticated approaches, it needs a small amount of training data to estimate the necessary parameters and quickly [82]. However, its performance may affect due to its strong assumptions on features independence. Gaussian, Multi- nomial, Complement, Bernoulli, and Categorical are the common variants of NB classifier [82]. – Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA): Linear Discrimi- nant Analysis (LDA) is a linear decision boundary clas- sifier created by fitting class conditional densities to data and applying Bayes’ rule [51, 82]. This method is also known as a generalization of Fisher’s linear discriminant, Fig. 3 A general structure of a machine learning based predictive which projects a given dataset into a lower-dimensional model considering both the training and testing phase space, i.e., a reduction of dimensionality that minimizes SN Computer Science
160 Page 6 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 the complexity of the model or reduces the resulting are the popular kernel functions used in SVM classifier model’s computational costs. The standard LDA model [82]. However, when the data set contains more noise, usually suits each class with a Gaussian density, assum- such as overlapping target classes, SVM does not per- ing that all classes share the same covariance matrix form well. [82]. LDA is closely related to ANOVA (analysis of – Decision tree (DT): Decision tree (DT) [88] is a well- variance) and regression analysis, which seek to express known non-parametric supervised learning method. one dependent variable as a linear combination of other DT learning methods are used for both the classifica- features or measurements. tion and regression tasks [82]. ID3 [87], C4.5 [88], and – Logistic regression (LR): Another common probabilistic CART [20] are well known for DT algorithms. Moreover, based statistical model used to solve classification issues recently proposed BehavDT [100], and IntrudTree [97] in machine learning is Logistic Regression (LR) [64]. by Sarker et al. are effective in the relevant application Logistic regression typically uses a logistic function to domains, such as user behavior analytics and cyberse- estimate the probabilities, which is also referred to as curity analytics, respectively. By sorting down the tree the mathematically defined sigmoid function in Eq. 1. from the root to some leaf nodes, as shown in Fig. 4, DT It can overfit high-dimensional datasets and works well classifies the instances. Instances are classified by check- when the dataset can be separated linearly. The regulari- ing the attribute defined by that node, starting at the root zation (L1 and L2) techniques [82] can be used to avoid node of the tree, and then moving down the tree branch over-fitting in such scenarios. The assumption of linear- corresponding to the attribute value. For splitting, the ity between the dependent and independent variables is most popular criteria are “gini” for the Gini impurity and considered as a major drawback of Logistic Regression. “entropy” for the information gain that can be expressed It can be used for both classification and regression prob- mathematically as [82]. lems, but it is more commonly used for classification. n Entropy∶H(x)=− p(x)log p(x) g(z)= 1 . ∑ i 2 i (2) 1+exp(−z) (1) i=1 – K-nearest neighbors (KNN): K-Nearest Neighbors c Gini(E)=1− p2. (KNN) [9] is an “instance-based learning” or non-gen- ∑ i (3) i=1 eralizing learning, also known as a “lazy learning” algo- rithm. It does not focus on constructing a general internal model; instead, it stores all instances corresponding to training data in n-dimensional space. KNN uses data and classifies new data points based on similarity measures – Random forest (RF): A random forest classifier [19] (e.g., Euclidean distance function) [82]. Classification is is well known as an ensemble classification technique computed from a simple majority vote of the k nearest that is used in the field of machine learning and data neighbors of each point. It is quite robust to noisy train- science in various application areas. This method uses ing data, and accuracy depends on the data quality. The biggest issue with KNN is to choose the optimal number of neighbors to be considered. KNN can be used both for classification as well as regression. – Support vector machine (SVM): In machine learning, another common technique that can be used for classi- fication, regression, or other tasks is a support vector machine (SVM) [56]. In high- or infinite-dimensional space, a support vector machine constructs a hyper-plane or set of hyper-planes. Intuitively, the hyper-plane, which has the greatest distance from the nearest training data points in any class, achieves a strong separation since, in general, the greater the margin, the lower the classifier’s generalization error. It is effective in high-dimensional spaces and can behave differently based on different mathematical functions known as the kernel. Linear, polynomial, radial basis function (RBF), sigmoid, etc., Fig. 4 An example of a decision tree structure SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 7 of 21 160 (XGBoost) is a form of gradient boosting that takes more detailed approximations into account when determining the best model [82]. It computes second-order gradients of the loss function to minimize loss and advanced regu- larization (L1 and L2) [82], which reduces over-fitting, and improves model generalization and performance. XGBoost is fast to interpret and can handle large-sized datasets well. – Stochastic gradient descent (SGD): Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [41] is an iterative method for optimiz- ing an objective function with appropriate smoothness properties, where the word ‘stochastic’ refers to random probability. This reduces the computational burden, par- ticularly in high-dimensional optimization problems, Fig. 5 An example of a random forest structure considering multiple allowing for faster iterations in exchange for a lower decision trees convergence rate. A gradient is the slope of a function that calculates a variable’s degree of change in response “parallel ensembling” which fits several decision tree to another variable’s changes. Mathematically, the Gradi- classifiers in parallel, as shown in Fig. 5, on different ent Descent is a convex function whose output is a partial data set sub-samples and uses majority voting or aver- derivative of a set of its input parameters. Let, 𝛼 is the ages for the outcome or final result. It thus minimizes learning rate, and J i is the training example cost of ith , the over-fitting problem and increases the prediction then Eq. (4) represents the stochastic gradient descent accuracy and control [82]. Therefore, the RF learning weight update method at the jth iteration. In large-scale model with multiple decision trees is typically more and sparse machine learning, SGD has been successfully accurate than a single decision tree based model [106]. applied to problems often encountered in text classifi- To build a series of decision trees with controlled vari- cation and natural language processing [82]. However, ation, it combines bootstrap aggregation (bagging) [18] SGD is sensitive to feature scaling and needs a range of and random feature selection [11]. It is adaptable to hyperparameters, such as the regularization parameter both classification and regression problems and fits and the number of iterations. well for both categorical and continuous values. 𝜕J – Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost): Adaptive Boost- w ∶= w −𝛼 i. j j 𝜕w (4) ing (AdaBoost) is an ensemble learning process that j employs an iterative approach to improve poor classi- – Rule-based classification: The term rule-based classifi- fiers by learning from their errors. This is developed cation can be used to refer to any classification scheme by Yoav Freund et al. [35] and also known as “meta- that makes use of IF-THEN rules for class prediction. learning”. Unlike the random forest that uses parallel Several classification algorithms such as Zero-R [125], ensembling, Adaboost uses “sequential ensembling”. One-R [47], decision trees [87, 88], DTNB [110], Ripple It creates a powerful classifier by combining many Down Rule learner (RIDOR) [125], Repeated Incremen- poorly performing classifiers to obtain a good classi- tal Pruning to Produce Error Reduction (RIPPER) [126] fier of high accuracy. In that sense, AdaBoost is called exist with the ability of rule generation. The decision an adaptive classifier by significantly improving the tree is one of the most common rule-based classifica- efficiency of the classifier, but in some instances, it tion algorithms among these techniques because it has can trigger overfits. AdaBoost is best used to boost the several advantages, such as being easier to interpret; the performance of decision trees, base estimator [82], on ability to handle high-dimensional data; simplicity and binary classification problems, however, is sensitive to speed; good accuracy; and the capability to produce rules noisy data and outliers. for human clear and understandable classification [127] – Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost): Gradient Boost- [128]. The decision tree-based rules also provide signifi- ing, like Random Forests [19] above, is an ensemble cant accuracy in a prediction model for unseen test cases learning algorithm that generates a final model based [106]. Since the rules are easily interpretable, these rule- on a series of individual models, typically decision based classifiers are often used to produce descriptive trees. The gradient is used to minimize the loss func- models that can describe a system including the entities tion, similar to how neural networks [41] use gradient and their relationships. descent to optimize weights. Extreme Gradient Boosting SN Computer Science
160 Page 8 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Regression Analysis value of the target variable based on the given predictor variable(s). Multiple linear regression is an extension of Regression analysis includes several methods of machine simple linear regression that allows two or more predic- learning that allow to predict a continuous (y) result variable tor variables to model a response variable, y, as a linear based on the value of one or more (x) predictor variables function [41] defined in Eq. 6, whereas simple linear [41]. The most significant distinction between classification regression has only 1 independent variable, defined in and regression is that classification predicts distinct class Eq. 5. labels, while regression facilitates the prediction of a con- • Polynomial regression: Polynomial regression is a form tinuous quantity. Figure 6 shows an example of how classifi- of regression analysis in which the relationship between cation is different with regression models. Some overlaps are the independent variable x and the dependent variable y often found between the two types of machine learning algo- is not linear, but is the polynomial degree of nth in x [82]. rithms. Regression models are now widely used in a variety The equation for polynomial regression is also derived of fields, including financial forecasting or prediction, cost from linear regression (polynomial regression of degree estimation, trend analysis, marketing, time series estimation, 1) equation, which is defined as below: drug response modeling, and many more. Some of the famil- y=b +b x+b x2+b x3+⋯+b xn+e. iar types of regression algorithms are linear, polynomial, 0 1 2 3 n (7) lasso and ridge regression, etc., which are explained briefly Here, y is the predicted/target output, b 0,b 1,...b n are the in the following. regression coefficients, x is an independent/ input vari- able. In simple words, we can say that if data are not dis- • Simple and multiple linear regression: This is one of tributed linearly, instead it is nth degree of polynomial the most popular ML modeling techniques as well as then we use polynomial regression to get desired output. a well-known regression technique. In this technique, • LASSO and ridge regression: LASSO and Ridge regres- the dependent variable is continuous, the independent sion are well known as powerful techniques which are variable(s) can be continuous or discrete, and the form typically used for building learning models in presence of the regression line is linear. Linear regression creates of a large number of features, due to their capability to a relationship between the dependent variable (Y) and preventing over-fitting and reducing the complexity of one or more independent variables (X) (also known as the model. The LASSO (least absolute shrinkage and regression line) using the best fit straight line [41]. It is selection operator) regression model uses L1 regulariza- defined by the following equations: tion technique [82] that uses shrinkage, which penalizes y=a+bx+e “absolute value of magnitude of coefficients” (L1 pen- (5) alty). As a result, LASSO appears to render coefficients y=a+b x +b x +⋯+b x +e, to absolute zero. Thus, LASSO regression aims to find 1 1 2 2 n n (6) the subset of predictors that minimizes the prediction where a is the intercept, b is the slope of the line, and e error for a quantitative response variable. On the other is the error term. This equation can be used to predict the hand, ridge regression uses L2 regularization [82], which is the “squared magnitude of coefficients” (L2 penalty). Thus, ridge regression forces the weights to be small but never sets the coefficient value to zero, and does a non- sparse solution. Overall, LASSO regression is useful to obtain a subset of predictors by eliminating less impor- tant features, and ridge regression is useful when a data set has “multicollinearity” which refers to the predictors that are correlated with other predictors. Cluster Analysis Cluster analysis, also known as clustering, is an unsuper- vised machine learning technique for identifying and group- ing related data points in large datasets without concern for Fig. 6 Classification vs. regression. In classification the dotted line the specific outcome. It does grouping a collection of objects represents a linear boundary that separates the two classes; in regres- in such a way that objects in the same category, called a sion, the dotted line models the linear relationship between the two variables cluster, are in some sense more similar to each other than SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 9 of 21 160 objects in other groups [41]. It is often used as a data analy- sis technique to discover interesting trends or patterns in data, e.g., groups of consumers based on their behavior. In a broad range of application areas, such as cybersecurity, e-commerce, mobile data processing, health analytics, user modeling and behavioral analytics, clustering can be used. In the following, we briefly discuss and summarize various types of clustering methods. – Partitioning methods: Based on the features and simi- larities in the data, this clustering approach categorizes the data into multiple groups or clusters. The data sci- entists or analysts typically determine the number of clusters either dynamically or statically depending on the nature of the target applications, to produce for the methods of clustering. The most common clustering algorithms based on partitioning methods are K-means [69], K-Mediods [80], CLARA [55] etc. – Density-based methods: To identify distinct groups or Fig. 7 A graphical interpretation of the widely-used hierarchical clus- clusters, it uses the concept that a cluster in the data tering (Bottom-up and top-down) technique space is a contiguous region of high point density iso- lated from other such clusters by contiguous regions of constraints to incorporate domain knowledge. Applica- low point density. Points that are not part of a cluster are tion or user-oriented constraints are incorporated to per- considered as noise. The typical clustering algorithms form the clustering. The typical algorithms of this kind based on density are DBSCAN [32], OPTICS [12] etc. of clustering are COP K-means [121], CMWK-Means The density-based methods typically struggle with clus- [27], etc. ters of similar density and high dimensionality data. – Hierarchical-based methods: Hierarchical clustering Many clustering algorithms have been proposed with the typically seeks to construct a hierarchy of clusters, i.e., ability to grouping data in machine learning and data sci- the tree structure. Strategies for hierarchical cluster- ence literature [41, 125]. In the following, we summarize the ing generally fall into two types: (i) Agglomerative—a popular methods that are used widely in various application “bottom-up” approach in which each observation begins areas. in its cluster and pairs of clusters are combined as one, moves up the hierarchy, and (ii) Divisive—a “top-down” – K-means clustering: K-means clustering [69] is a fast, approach in which all observations begin in one cluster robust, and simple algorithm that provides reliable results and splits are performed recursively, moves down the when data sets are well-separated from each other. The hierarchy, as shown in Fig 7. Our earlier proposed BOTS data points are allocated to a cluster in this algorithm technique, Sarker et al. [102] is an example of a hierar- in such a way that the amount of the squared distance chical, particularly, bottom-up clustering algorithm. between the data points and the centroid is as small as – Grid-based methods: To deal with massive datasets, grid- possible. In other words, the K-means algorithm identi- based clustering is especially suitable. To obtain clusters, fies the k number of centroids and then assigns each data the principle is first to summarize the dataset with a grid point to the nearest cluster while keeping the centroids as representation and then to combine grid cells. STING small as possible. Since it begins with a random selection [122], CLIQUE [6], etc. are the standard algorithms of of cluster centers, the results can be inconsistent. Since grid-based clustering. extreme values can easily affect a mean, the K-means – Model-based methods: There are mainly two types of clustering algorithm is sensitive to outliers. K-medoids model-based clustering algorithms: one that uses statisti- clustering [91] is a variant of K-means that is more robust cal learning, and the other based on a method of neural to noises and outliers. network learning [130]. For instance, GMM [89] is an – Mean-shift clustering: Mean-shift clustering [37] is example of a statistical learning method, and SOM [22] a nonparametric clustering technique that does not [96] is an example of a neural network learning method. require prior knowledge of the number of clusters or – Constraint-based methods: Constrained-based clustering constraints on cluster shape. Mean-shift clustering is a semi-supervised approach to data clustering that uses aims to discover “blobs” in a smooth distribution or SN Computer Science
160 Page 10 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 density of samples [82]. It is a centroid-based algo- such techniques. The main advantage of agglomerative rithm that works by updating centroid candidates to be hierarchical clustering over k-means is that the tree-struc- the mean of the points in a given region. To form the ture hierarchy generated by agglomerative clustering is final set of centroids, these candidates are filtered in a more informative than the unstructured collection of flat post-processing stage to remove near-duplicates. Clus- clusters returned by k-means, which can help to make ter analysis in computer vision and image processing better decisions in the relevant application areas. are examples of application domains. Mean Shift has Dimensionality Reduction and Feature Learning the disadvantage of being computationally expensive. Moreover, in cases of high dimension, where the num- ber of clusters shifts abruptly, the mean-shift algorithm In machine learning and data science, high-dimensional does not work well. data processing is a challenging task for both researchers – DBSCAN: Density-based spatial clustering of applica- and application developers. Thus, dimensionality reduc- tions with noise (DBSCAN) [32] is a base algorithm for tion which is an unsupervised learning technique, is impor- density-based clustering which is widely used in data tant because it leads to better human interpretations, lower mining and machine learning. This is known as a non- computational costs, and avoids overfitting and redundancy parametric density-based clustering technique for sepa- by simplifying models. Both the process of feature selec- rating high-density clusters from low-density clusters tion and feature extraction can be used for dimensionality that are used in model building. DBSCAN’s main idea reduction. The primary distinction between the selection and is that a point belongs to a cluster if it is close to many extraction of features is that the “feature selection” keeps a points from that cluster. It can find clusters of various subset of the original features [97], while “feature extrac- shapes and sizes in a vast volume of data that is noisy tion” creates brand new ones [98]. In the following, we and contains outliers. DBSCAN, unlike k-means, does briefly discuss these techniques. not require a priori specification of the number of clus- ters in the data and can find arbitrarily shaped clusters. – Feature selection: The selection of features, also known Although k-means is much faster than DBSCAN, it is as the selection of variables or attributes in the data, is efficient at finding high-density regions and outliers, i.e., the process of choosing a subset of unique features (vari- is robust to outliers. ables, predictors) to use in building machine learning and – GMM clustering: Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) are data science model. It decreases a model’s complexity by often used for data clustering, which is a distribution- eliminating the irrelevant or less important features and based clustering algorithm. A Gaussian mixture model allows for faster training of machine learning algorithms. is a probabilistic model in which all the data points are A right and optimal subset of the selected features in a produced by a mixture of a finite number of Gaussian problem domain is capable to minimize the overfitting distributions with unknown parameters [82]. To find the problem through simplifying and generalizing the model Gaussian parameters for each cluster, an optimization as well as increases the model’s accuracy [97]. Thus, algorithm called expectation-maximization (EM) [82] “feature selection” [66, 99] is considered as one of the can be used. EM is an iterative method that uses a sta- primary concepts in machine learning that greatly affects tistical model to estimate the parameters. In contrast to the effectiveness and efficiency of the target machine k-means, Gaussian mixture models account for uncer- learning model. Chi-squared test, Analysis of variance tainty and return the likelihood that a data point belongs (ANOVA) test, Pearson’s correlation coefficient, recur- to one of the k clusters. GMM clustering is more robust sive feature elimination, are some popular techniques that than k-means and works well even with non-linear data can be used for feature selection. distributions. – Feature extraction: In a machine learning-based model – Agglomerative hierarchical clustering: The most com- or system, feature extraction techniques usually provide mon method of hierarchical clustering used to group a better understanding of the data, a way to improve pre- objects in clusters based on their similarity is agglom- diction accuracy, and to reduce computational cost or erative clustering. This technique uses a bottom-up training time. The aim of “feature extraction” [66, 99] is approach, where each object is first treated as a singleton to reduce the number of features in a dataset by generat- cluster by the algorithm. Following that, pairs of clus- ing new ones from the existing ones and then discarding ters are merged one by one until all clusters have been the original features. The majority of the information merged into a single large cluster containing all objects. found in the original set of features can then be summa- The result is a dendrogram, which is a tree-based repre- rized using this new reduced set of features. For instance, sentation of the elements. Single linkage [115], Complete principal components analysis (PCA) is often used as a linkage [116], BOTS [102] etc. are some examples of dimensionality-reduction technique to extract a lower- SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 11 of 21 160 dimensional space creating new brand components from utilizes F tests. For feature selection, the results ‘ANOVA the existing features in a dataset [98]. F value’ [82] of this test can be used where certain fea- tures independent of the goal variable can be omitted. Many algorithms have been proposed to reduce data dimen- • Chi square: The chi-square 𝜒2 [82] statistic is an esti- sions in the machine learning and data science literature [41, mate of the difference between the effects of a series of 125]. In the following, we summarize the popular methods events or variables observed and expected frequencies. that are used widely in various application areas. The magnitude of the difference between the real and observed values, the degrees of freedom, and the sample • Variance threshold: A simple basic approach to feature size depends on 𝜒2 . The chi-square 𝜒2 is commonly used selection is the variance threshold [82]. This excludes all for testing relationships between categorical variables. If features of low variance, i.e., all features whose variance O i represents observed value and E i represents expected does not exceed the threshold. It eliminates all zero-var- value, then iance characteristics by default, i.e., characteristics that n (O −E)2 have the same value in all samples. This feature selection 𝜒2 = i i . ∑ E (9) algorithm looks only at the (X) features, not the (y) out- i=1 i puts needed, and can, therefore, be used for unsupervised • Recursive feature elimination (RFE): Recursive Feature learning. • Pearson correlation: Pearson’s correlation is another Elimination (RFE) is a brute force approach to feature selection. RFE [82] fits the model and removes the method to understand a feature’s relation to the response weakest feature before it meets the specified number variable and can be used for feature selection [99]. This of features. Features are ranked by the coefficients or method is also used for finding the association between the features in a dataset. The resulting value is [−1,1] , feature significance of the model. RFE aims to remove where −1 means perfect negative correlation, +1 means dependencies and collinearity in the model by recursively removing a small number of features per iteration. perfect positive correlation, and 0 means that the two • Model-based selection: To reduce the dimensionality of variables do not have a linear correlation. If two random variables represent X and Y, then the correlation coef- the data, linear models penalized with the L1 regulariza- ficient between X and Y is defined as [41] tion can be used. Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso) regression is a type of linear regression r(X,Y)= ∑n i=1(X i−X̄)(Y i−Ȳ) . that has the property of shrinking some of the coefficients n (X −X̄)2 n (Y −Ȳ)2 (8) to zero [82]. Therefore, that feature can be removed from � ∑i=1 i � ∑i=1 i the model. Thus, the penalized lasso regression method, often used in machine learning to select the subset of • ANOVA: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) is a statisti- variables. Extra Trees Classifier [82] is an example of a cal tool used to verify the mean values of two or more tree-based estimator that can be used to compute impu- groups that differ significantly from each other. ANOVA rity-based function importance, which can then be used assumes a linear relationship between the variables and to discard irrelevant features. the target and the variables’ normal distribution. To sta- • Principal component analysis (PCA): Principal compo- tistically test the equality of means, the ANOVA method nent analysis (PCA) is a well-known unsupervised learn- Fig. 8 An example of a principal component analysis (PCA) and created principal components PC1 and PC2 in different dimension space SN Computer Science
160 Page 12 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 ing approach in the field of machine learning and data the Apriori property of frequent itemset [8]. The term science. PCA is a mathematical technique that transforms ‘Apriori’ usually refers to having prior knowledge of a set of correlated variables into a set of uncorrelated frequent itemset properties. Apriori uses a “bottom-up” variables known as principal components [48, 81]. Fig- approach, where it generates the candidate itemsets. To ure 8 shows an example of the effect of PCA on various reduce the search space, Apriori uses the property “all dimensions space, where Fig. 8a shows the original fea- subsets of a frequent itemset must be frequent; and if an tures in 3D space, and Fig. 8b shows the created prin- itemset is infrequent, then all its supersets must also be cipal components PC1 and PC2 onto a 2D plane, and infrequent”. Another approach predictive Apriori [108] 1D line with the principal component PC1 respectively. can also generate rules; however, it receives unexpected Thus, PCA can be used as a feature extraction technique results as it combines both the support and confidence. that reduces the dimensionality of the datasets, and to The Apriori [8] is the widely applicable techniques in build an effective machine learning model [98]. Techni- mining association rules. cally, PCA identifies the completely transformed with the – ECLAT: This technique was proposed by Zaki et al. [131] highest eigenvalues of a covariance matrix and then uses and stands for Equivalence Class Clustering and bottom- those to project the data into a new subspace of equal or up Lattice Traversal. ECLAT uses a depth-first search to fewer dimensions [82]. find frequent itemsets. In contrast to the Apriori [8] algo- rithm, which represents data in a horizontal pattern, it Association Rule Learning represents data vertically. Hence, the ECLAT algorithm is more efficient and scalable in the area of association Association rule learning is a rule-based machine learn- rule learning. This algorithm is better suited for small ing approach to discover interesting relationships, “IF- and medium datasets whereas the Apriori algorithm is THEN” statements, in large datasets between variables used for large datasets. [7]. One example is that “if a customer buys a computer or – FP-Growth: Another common association rule learning laptop (an item), s/he is likely to also buy anti-virus soft- technique based on the frequent-pattern tree (FP-tree) ware (another item) at the same time”. Association rules proposed by Han et al. [42] is Frequent Pattern Growth, are employed today in many application areas, including known as FP-Growth. The key difference with Apriori IoT services, medical diagnosis, usage behavior analytics, is that while generating rules, the Apriori algorithm [8] web usage mining, smartphone applications, cybersecurity generates frequent candidate itemsets; on the other hand, applications, and bioinformatics. In comparison to sequence the FP-growth algorithm [42] prevents candidate genera- mining, association rule learning does not usually take into tion and thus produces a tree by the successful strategy of account the order of things within or across transactions. ‘divide and conquer’ approach. Due to its sophistication, A common way of measuring the usefulness of association however, FP-Tree is challenging to use in an interactive rules is to use its parameter, the ‘support’ and ‘confidence’, mining environment [133]. Thus, the FP-Tree would not which is introduced in [7]. fit into memory for massive data sets, making it chal- In the data mining literature, many association rule learn- lenging to process big data as well. Another solution is ing methods have been proposed, such as logic dependent RARM (Rapid Association Rule Mining) proposed by [34], frequent pattern based [8, 49, 68], and tree-based [42]. Das et al. [26] but faces a related FP-tree issue [133]. The most popular association rule learning algorithms are – ABC-RuleMiner: A rule-based machine learning method, summarized below. recently proposed in our earlier paper, by Sarker et al. [104], to discover the interesting non-redundant rules to – AIS and SETM: AIS is the first algorithm proposed by provide real-world intelligent services. This algorithm Agrawal et al. [7] for association rule mining. The AIS effectively identifies the redundancy in associations algorithm’s main downside is that too many candidate by taking into account the impact or precedence of the itemsets are generated, requiring more space and wasting related contextual features and discovers a set of non- a lot of effort. This algorithm calls for too many passes redundant association rules. This algorithm first con- over the entire dataset to produce the rules. Another structs an association generation tree (AGT), a top-down approach SETM [49] exhibits good performance and approach, and then extracts the association rules through stable behavior with execution time; however, it suffers traversing the tree. Thus, ABC-RuleMiner is more potent from the same flaw as the AIS algorithm. than traditional rule-based methods in terms of both – Apriori: For generating association rules for a given data- non-redundant rule generation and intelligent decision- set, Agrawal et al. [8] proposed the Apriori, Apriori-TID, making, particularly in a context-aware smart comput- and Apriori-Hybrid algorithms. These later algorithms ing environment, where human or user preferences are outperform the AIS and SETM mentioned above due to involved. SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 13 of 21 160 Among the association rule learning techniques discussed (hence the term “model-free”), and it can deal with sto- above, Apriori [8] is the most widely used algorithm for chastic transitions and rewards without the need for adap- discovering association rules from a given dataset [133]. tations. The ‘Q’ in Q-learning usually stands for qual- The main strength of the association learning technique is ity, as the algorithm calculates the maximum expected its comprehensiveness, as it generates all associations that rewards for a given behavior in a given state. satisfy the user-specified constraints, such as minimum sup- – Deep Q-learning: The basic working step in Deep port and confidence value. The ABC-RuleMiner approach Q-Learning [52] is that the initial state is fed into the [104] discussed earlier could give significant results in terms neural network, which returns the Q-value of all pos- of non-redundant rule generation and intelligent decision- sible actions as an output. Still, when we have a reason- making for the relevant application areas in the real world. ably simple setting to overcome, Q-learning works well. However, when the number of states and actions becomes Reinforcement Learning more complicated, deep learning can be used as a func- tion approximator. Reinforcement learning (RL) is a machine learning tech- nique that allows an agent to learn by trial and error in an Reinforcement learning, along with supervised and unsu- interactive environment using input from its actions and pervised learning, is one of the basic machine learning para- experiences. Unlike supervised learning, which is based on digms. RL can be used to solve numerous real-world prob- given sample data or examples, the RL method is based on lems in various fields, such as game theory, control theory, interacting with the environment. The problem to be solved operations analysis, information theory, simulation-based in reinforcement learning (RL) is defined as a Markov Deci- optimization, manufacturing, supply chain logistics, multi- sion Process (MDP) [86], i.e., all about sequentially making agent systems, swarm intelligence, aircraft control, robot decisions. An RL problem typically includes four elements motion control, and many more. such as Agent, Environment, Rewards, and Policy. Artificial Neural Network and Deep Learning RL can be split roughly into Model-based and Model- free techniques. Model-based RL is the process of infer- ring optimal behavior from a model of the environment Deep learning is part of a wider family of artificial neural by performing actions and observing the results, which networks (ANN)-based machine learning approaches with include the next state and the immediate reward [85]. Alp- representation learning. Deep learning provides a computa- haZero, AlphaGo [113] are examples of the model-based tional architecture by combining several processing layers, approaches. On the other hand, a model-free approach such as input, hidden, and output layers, to learn from data does not use the distribution of the transition probability [41]. The main advantage of deep learning over traditional and the reward function associated with MDP. Q-learn- machine learning methods is its better performance in sev- ing, Deep Q Network, Monte Carlo Control, SARSA eral cases, particularly learning from large datasets [105, (State–Action–Reward–State–Action), etc. are some exam- 129]. Figure 9 shows a general performance of deep learning ples of model-free algorithms [52]. The policy network, over machine learning considering the increasing amount of which is required for model-based RL but not for model- data. However, it may vary depending on the data character- free, is the key difference between model-free and model- istics and experimental set up. based learning. In the following, we discuss the popular RL The most common deep learning algorithms are: Multi- algorithms. layer Perceptron (MLP), Convolutional Neural Network – Monte Carlo methods: Monte Carlo techniques, or Monte Carlo experiments, are a wide category of computational algorithms that rely on repeated random sampling to obtain numerical results [52]. The underlying concept is to use randomness to solve problems that are determinis- tic in principle. Optimization, numerical integration, and making drawings from the probability distribution are the three problem classes where Monte Carlo techniques are most commonly used. – Q-learning: Q-learning is a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm for learning the quality of behaviors that tell an agent what action to take under what condi- Fig. 9 Machine learning and deep learning performance in general tions [52]. It does not need a model of the environment with the amount of data SN Computer Science
160 Page 14 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 As it takes the advantage of the two-dimensional (2D) structure of the input data, it is typically broadly used in several areas such as image and video recognition, image processing and classification, medical image analysis, natural language processing, etc. While CNN has a greater computational burden, without any manual intervention, it has the advantage of automati- cally detecting the important features, and hence CNN is considered to be more powerful than conventional ANN. A number of advanced deep learning models based on CNN can be used in the field, such as AlexNet [60], Xception [24], Inception [118], Visual Geometry Group (VGG) [44], ResNet [45], etc. Fig. 10 A structure of an artificial neural network modeling with multiple processing layers – LSTM-RNN: Long short-term memory (LSTM) is an artificial recurrent neural network (RNN) architec- ture used in the area of deep learning [38]. LSTM has feedback links, unlike normal feed-forward neural networks. LSTM networks are well-suited for analyz- ing and learning sequential data, such as classifying, processing, and predicting data based on time series data, which differentiates it from other conventional networks. Thus, LSTM can be used when the data are in a sequential format, such as time, sentence, etc., and commonly applied in the area of time-series analysis, natural language processing, speech recognition, etc. Fig. 11 An example of a convolutional neural network (CNN or Con- In addition to these most common deep learning vNet) including multiple convolution and pooling layers methods discussed above, several other deep learning approaches [96] exist in the area for various purposes. For (CNN, or ConvNet), Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent instance, the self-organizing map (SOM) [58] uses unsu- Neural Network (LSTM-RNN) [96]. In the following, we pervised learning to represent the high-dimensional data discuss various types of deep learning methods that can by a 2D grid map, thus achieving dimensionality reduc- be used to build effective data-driven models for various tion. The autoencoder (AE) [15] is another learning tech- purposes. nique that is widely used for dimensionality reduction as well and feature extraction in unsupervised learning tasks. – MLP: The base architecture of deep learning, which is Restricted Boltzmann machines (RBM) [46] can be used also known as the feed-forward artificial neural network, for dimensionality reduction, classification, regression, is called a multilayer perceptron (MLP) [82]. A typical collaborative filtering, feature learning, and topic mod- MLP is a fully connected network consisting of an input eling. A deep belief network (DBN) is typically composed layer, one or more hidden layers, and an output layer, of simple, unsupervised networks such as restricted Boltz- as shown in Fig. 10. Each node in one layer connects mann machines (RBMs) or autoencoders, and a backprop- to each node in the following layer at a certain weight. agation neural network (BPNN) [123]. A generative adver- MLP utilizes the “Backpropagation” technique [41], the sarial network (GAN) [39] is a form of the network for most “fundamental building block” in a neural network, deep learning that can generate data with characteristics to adjust the weight values internally while building the close to the actual data input. Transfer learning is currently model. MLP is sensitive to scaling features and allows very common because it can train deep neural networks a variety of hyperparameters to be tuned, such as the with comparatively low data, which is typically the re-use number of hidden layers, neurons, and iterations, which of a new problem with a pre-trained model [124]. A brief can result in a computationally costly model. discussion of these artificial neural networks (ANN) and – CNN or ConvNet: The convolution neural network deep learning (DL) models are summarized in our earlier (CNN) [65] enhances the design of the standard ANN, paper Sarker et al. [96]. consisting of convolutional layers, pooling layers, as Overall, based on the learning techniques discussed well as fully connected layers, as shown in Fig. 11. above, we can conclude that various types of machine SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 15 of 21 160 learning techniques, such as classification analysis, regres- To detect various types of cyber-attacks or intrusions sion, data clustering, feature selection and extraction, and machine learning classification models by taking into dimensionality reduction, association rule learning, rein- account the impact of security features are useful [97]. forcement learning, or deep learning techniques, can play Various deep learning-based security models can also a significant role for various purposes according to their be used on the large scale of security datasets [96, 129]. capabilities. In the following section, we discuss several Moreover, security policy rules generated by associa- application areas based on machine learning algorithms. tion rule learning techniques can play a significant role to build a rule-based security system [105]. Thus, we can say that various learning techniques discussed in Applications of Machine Learning Sect. Machine Learning Tasks and Algorithms, can enable cybersecurity professionals to be more proac- In the current age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution tive inefficiently preventing threats and cyber-attacks. (4IR), machine learning becomes popular in various appli- – Internet of things (IoT) and smart cities: Internet of cation areas, because of its learning capabilities from the Things (IoT) is another essential area of Industry 4.0. past and making intelligent decisions. In the following, [114], which turns everyday objects into smart objects we summarize and discuss ten popular application areas by allowing them to transmit data and automate tasks of machine learning technology. without the need for human interaction. IoT is, therefore, considered to be the big frontier that can enhance almost – Predictive analytics and intelligent decision-making: A all activities in our lives, such as smart governance, smart major application field of machine learning is intelli- home, education, communication, transportation, retail, gent decision-making by data-driven predictive analyt- agriculture, health care, business, and many more [70]. ics [21, 70]. The basis of predictive analytics is captur- Smart city is one of IoT’s core fields of application, using ing and exploiting relationships between explanatory technologies to enhance city services and residents’ liv- variables and predicted variables from previous events ing experiences [132, 135]. As machine learning utilizes to predict the unknown outcome [41]. For instance, experience to recognize trends and create models that identifying suspects or criminals after a crime has help predict future behavior and events, it has become a been committed, or detecting credit card fraud as it crucial technology for IoT applications [103]. For exam- happens. Another application, where machine learn- ple, to predict traffic in smart cities, parking availabil- ing algorithms can assist retailers in better understand- ity prediction, estimate the total usage of energy of the ing consumer preferences and behavior, better manage citizens for a particular period, make context-aware and inventory, avoiding out-of-stock situations, and opti- timely decisions for the people, etc. are some tasks that mizing logistics and warehousing in e-commerce. Vari- can be solved using machine learning techniques accord- ous machine learning algorithms such as decision trees, ing to the current needs of the people. support vector machines, artificial neural networks, etc. – Traffic prediction and transportation: Transportation [106, 125] are commonly used in the area. Since accu- systems have become a crucial component of every rate predictions provide insight into the unknown, they country’s economic development. Nonetheless, several can improve the decisions of industries, businesses, and cities around the world are experiencing an excessive almost any organization, including government agen- rise in traffic volume, resulting in serious issues such as cies, e-commerce, telecommunications, banking and delays, traffic congestion, higher fuel prices, increased financial services, healthcare, sales and marketing, CO2 pollution, accidents, emergencies, and a decline in transportation, social networking, and many others. modern society’s quality of life [40]. Thus, an intelligent – Cybersecurity and threat intelligence: Cybersecurity is transportation system through predicting future traffic one of the most essential areas of Industry 4.0. [114], is important, which is an indispensable part of a smart which is typically the practice of protecting networks, city. Accurate traffic prediction based on machine and systems, hardware, and data from digital attacks [114]. deep learning modeling can help to minimize the issues Machine learning has become a crucial cybersecurity [17, 30, 31]. For example, based on the travel history technology that constantly learns by analyzing data to and trend of traveling through various routes, machine identify patterns, better detect malware in encrypted learning can assist transportation companies in predict- traffic, find insider threats, predict where bad neigh- ing possible issues that may occur on specific routes and borhoods are online, keep people safe while browsing, recommending their customers to take a different path. or secure data in the cloud by uncovering suspicious Ultimately, these learning-based data-driven models help activity. For instance, clustering techniques can be improve traffic flow, increase the usage and efficiency of used to identify cyber-anomalies, policy violations, etc. SN Computer Science
160 Page 16 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 sustainable modes of transportation, and limit real-world lyze sentiment, and decide which aspects are significant, disruption by modeling and visualizing future changes. where machine learning techniques can be used. Virtual – Healthcare and COVID-19 pandemic: Machine learning personal assistant, chatbot, speech recognition, document can help to solve diagnostic and prognostic problems in description, language or machine translation, etc. are a variety of medical domains, such as disease prediction, some examples of NLP-related tasks. Sentiment Analy- medical knowledge extraction, detecting regularities in sis [90] (also referred to as opinion mining or emotion data, patient management, etc. [33, 77, 112]. Coronavirus AI) is an NLP sub-field that seeks to identify and extract disease (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by public mood and views within a given text through blogs, a newly discovered coronavirus, according to the World reviews, social media, forums, news, etc. For instance, Health Organization (WHO) [3]. Recently, the learning businesses and brands use sentiment analysis to under- techniques have become popular in the battle against stand the social sentiment of their brand, product, or COVID-19 [61, 63]. For the COVID-19 pandemic, the service through social media platforms or the web as learning techniques are used to classify patients at high a whole. Overall, sentiment analysis is considered as a risk, their mortality rate, and other anomalies [61]. It machine learning task that analyzes texts for polarity, can also be used to better understand the virus’s ori- such as “positive”, “negative”, or “neutral” along with gin, COVID-19 outbreak prediction, as well as for dis- more intense emotions like very happy, happy, sad, very ease diagnosis and treatment [14, 50]. With the help of sad, angry, have interest, or not interested etc. machine learning, researchers can forecast where and – Image, speech and pattern recognition: Image recogni- when, the COVID-19 is likely to spread, and notify those tion [36] is a well-known and widespread example of regions to match the required arrangements. Deep learn- machine learning in the real world, which can identify an ing also provides exciting solutions to the problems of object as a digital image. For instance, to label an x-ray medical image processing and is seen as a crucial tech- as cancerous or not, character recognition, or face detec- nique for potential applications, particularly for COVID- tion in an image, tagging suggestions on social media, 19 pandemic [10, 78, 111]. Overall, machine and deep e.g., Facebook, are common examples of image recog- learning techniques can help to fight the COVID-19 virus nition. Speech recognition [23] is also very popular that and the pandemic as well as intelligent clinical decisions typically uses sound and linguistic models, e.g., Google making in the domain of healthcare. Assistant, Cortana, Siri, Alexa, etc. [67], where machine – E-commerce and product recommendations: Product rec- learning methods are used. Pattern recognition [13] is ommendation is one of the most well known and widely defined as the automated recognition of patterns and used applications of machine learning, and it is one of regularities in data, e.g., image analysis. Several machine the most prominent features of almost any e-commerce learning techniques such as classification, feature selec- website today. Machine learning technology can assist tion, clustering, or sequence labeling methods are used businesses in analyzing their consumers’ purchasing his- in the area. tories and making customized product suggestions for – Sustainable agriculture: Agriculture is essential to the their next purchase based on their behavior and prefer- survival of all human activities [109]. Sustainable agri- ences. E-commerce companies, for example, can easily culture practices help to improve agricultural productiv- position product suggestions and offers by analyzing ity while also reducing negative impacts on the environ- browsing trends and click-through rates of specific items. ment [5, 25, 109]. The sustainable agriculture supply Using predictive modeling based on machine learning chains are knowledge-intensive and based on informa- techniques, many online retailers, such as Amazon [71], tion, skills, technologies, etc., where knowledge transfer can better manage inventory, prevent out-of-stock situa- encourages farmers to enhance their decisions to adopt tions, and optimize logistics and warehousing. The future sustainable agriculture practices utilizing the increas- of sales and marketing is the ability to capture, evaluate, ing amount of data captured by emerging technologies, and use consumer data to provide a customized shopping e.g., the Internet of Things (IoT), mobile technologies experience. Furthermore, machine learning techniques and devices, etc. [5, 53, 54]. Machine learning can be enable companies to create packages and content that are applied in various phases of sustainable agriculture, such tailored to the needs of their customers, allowing them to as in the pre-production phase - for the prediction of crop maintain existing customers while attracting new ones. yield, soil properties, irrigation requirements, etc.; in the – NLP and sentiment analysis: Natural language pro- production phase—for weather prediction, disease detec- cessing (NLP) involves the reading and understanding tion, weed detection, soil nutrient management, livestock of spoken or written language through the medium of management, etc.; in processing phase—for demand esti- a computer [79, 103]. Thus, NLP helps computers, for mation, production planning, etc. and in the distribution instance, to read a text, hear speech, interpret it, ana- SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 17 of 21 160 phase - the inventory management, consumer analysis, production of a huge amount of data with very high fre- etc. quency. Thus, collecting useful data for the target machine – User behavior analytics and context-aware smartphone learning-based applications, e.g., smart city applications, applications: Context-awareness is a system’s abil- and their management is important to further analysis. ity to capture knowledge about its surroundings at any Therefore, a more in-depth investigation of data collection moment and modify behaviors accordingly [28, 93]. methods is needed while working on the real-world data. Context-aware computing uses software and hardware Moreover, the historical data may contain many ambiguous to automatically collect and interpret data for direct values, missing values, outliers, and meaningless data. The responses. The mobile app development environment machine learning algorithms, discussed in Sect “Machine has been changed greatly with the power of AI, particu- Learning Tasks and Algorithms” highly impact on data qual- larly, machine learning techniques through their learning ity, and availability for training, and consequently on the capabilities from contextual data [103, 136]. Thus, the resultant model. Thus, to accurately clean and pre-process developers of mobile apps can rely on machine learning the diverse data collected from diverse sources is a chal- to create smart apps that can understand human behavior, lenging task. Therefore, effectively modifying or enhance support, and entertain users [107, 137, 140]. To build existing pre-processing methods, or proposing new data various personalized data-driven context-aware systems, preparation techniques are required to effectively use the such as smart interruption management, smart mobile learning algorithms in the associated application domain. recommendation, context-aware smart searching, deci- To analyze the data and extract insights, there exist many sion-making that intelligently assist end mobile phone machine learning algorithms, summarized in Sect. “Machine users in a pervasive computing environment, machine Learning Tasks and Algorithms”. Thus, selecting a proper learning techniques are applicable. For example, context- learning algorithm that is suitable for the target application aware association rules can be used to build an intelligent is challenging. The reason is that the outcome of different phone call application [104]. Clustering approaches are learning algorithms may vary depending on the data charac- useful in capturing users’ diverse behavioral activities by teristics [106]. Selecting a wrong learning algorithm would taking into account data in time series [102]. To predict result in producing unexpected outcomes that may lead to the future events in various contexts, the classification loss of effort, as well as the model’s effectiveness and accu- methods can be used [106, 139]. Thus, various learning racy. In terms of model building, the techniques discussed techniques discussed in Sect. “Machine Learning Tasks in Sect. “Machine Learning Tasks and Algorithms” can and Algorithms” can help to build context-aware adap- directly be used to solve many real-world issues in diverse tive and smart applications according to the preferences domains, such as cybersecurity, smart cities and healthcare of the mobile phone users. summarized in Sect. “Applications of Machine Learning”. However, the hybrid learning model, e.g., the ensemble of In addition to these application areas, machine learning- methods, modifying or enhancement of the existing learning based models can also apply to several other domains such techniques, or designing new learning methods, could be a as bioinformatics, cheminformatics, computer networks, potential future work in the area. DNA sequence classification, economics and banking, robot- Thus, the ultimate success of a machine learning-based ics, advanced engineering, and many more. solution and corresponding applications mainly depends on both the data and the learning algorithms. If the data are bad to learn, such as non-representative, poor-quality, Challenges and Research Directions irrelevant features, or insufficient quantity for training, then the machine learning models may become useless or will Our study on machine learning algorithms for intelligent produce lower accuracy. Therefore, effectively processing data analysis and applications opens several research issues the data and handling the diverse learning algorithms are in the area. Thus, in this section, we summarize and discuss important, for a machine learning-based solution and eventu- the challenges faced and the potential research opportunities ally building intelligent applications. and future directions. In general, the effectiveness and the efficiency of a Conclusion machine learning-based solution depend on the nature and characteristics of the data, and the performance of the learn- ing algorithms. To collect the data in the relevant domain, In this paper, we have conducted a comprehensive overview such as cybersecurity, IoT, healthcare and agriculture dis- of machine learning algorithms for intelligent data analysis cussed in Sect. “Applications of Machine Learning” is not and applications. According to our goal, we have briefly dis- straightforward, although the current cyberspace enables the cussed how various types of machine learning methods can SN Computer Science
160 Page 18 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 be used for making solutions to various real-world issues. 12. Ankerst M, Breunig MM, Kriegel H-P, Sander J. Optics: ordering A successful machine learning model depends on both the points to identify the clustering structure. ACM Sigmod Record. 1999;28(2):49–60. data and the performance of the learning algorithms. The 13. Anzai Y. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Elsevier; sophisticated learning algorithms then need to be trained 2012. through the collected real-world data and knowledge related 14. Ardabili SF, Mosavi A, Ghamisi P, Ferdinand F, Varkonyi-Koczy to the target application before the system can assist with AR, Reuter U, Rabczuk T, Atkinson PM. Covid-19 outbreak pre- diction with machine learning. Algorithms. 2020;13(10):249. intelligent decision-making. We also discussed several 15. Baldi P. Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architec- popular application areas based on machine learning tech- tures. In: Proceedings of ICML workshop on unsupervised and niques to highlight their applicability in various real-world transfer learning, 2012; 37–49 . issues. Finally, we have summarized and discussed the chal- 16. Balducci F, Impedovo D, Pirlo G. Machine learning applications on agricultural datasets for smart farm enhancement. Machines. lenges faced and the potential research opportunities and 2018;6(3):38. future directions in the area. Therefore, the challenges that 17. Boukerche A, Wang J. Machine learning-based traffic predic- are identified create promising research opportunities in the tion models for intelligent transportation systems. Comput field which must be addressed with effective solutions in Netw. 2020;181 18. Breiman L. Bagging predictors. Mach Learn. various application areas. Overall, we believe that our study 1996;24(2):123–40. on machine learning-based solutions opens up a promising 19. Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learn. 2001;45(1):5–32. direction and can be used as a reference guide for potential 20. Breiman L, Friedman J, Stone CJ, Olshen RA. Classification and research and applications for both academia and industry regression trees. CRC Press; 1984. 21. Cao L. Data science: a comprehensive overview. ACM Comput professionals as well as for decision-makers, from a techni- Surv (CSUR). 2017;50(3):43. cal point of view. 22. Carpenter GA, Grossberg S. A massively parallel architecture for a self-organizing neural pattern recognition machine. Comput Vis Graph Image Process. 1987;37(1):54–115. Declaration 23. Chiu C-C, Sainath TN, Wu Y, Prabhavalkar R, Nguyen P, Chen Z, Kannan A, Weiss RJ, Rao K, Gonina E, et al. State-of-the-art speech recognition with sequence-to-sequence models. In: 2018 Conflict of interest The author declares no conflict of interest. IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2018 pages 4774–4778. IEEE . 24. Chollet F. Xception: deep learning with depthwise separable con- volutions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer References vision and pattern recognition, pages 1251–1258, 2017. 25. Cobuloglu H, Büyüktahtakın IE. A stochastic multi-criteria deci- sion analysis for sustainable biomass crop selection. Expert Syst 1. Canadian institute of cybersecurity, university of new brun- Appl. 2015;42(15–16):6065–74. swick, iscx dataset, http://w ww.u nb.c a/c ic/d atase ts/i ndex.h tml/ 26. Das A, Ng W-K, Woon Y-K. Rapid association rule mining. In: (Accessed on 20 October 2019). Proceedings of the tenth international conference on Information 2. Cic-ddos2019 [online]. available: https://w ww.u nb.c a/c ic/d atas and knowledge management, pages 474–481. ACM, 2001. ets/d dos-2 019.h tml/ (Accessed on 28 March 2020). 27. de Amorim RC. Constrained clustering with minkowski weighted 3. World health organization: WHO. http://w ww.w ho.i nt/. k-means. In: 2012 IEEE 13th International Symposium on Com- 4. Google trends. In https://t rends.g oogle.c om/t rends/, 2019. putational Intelligence and Informatics (CINTI), pages 13–17. 5. Adnan N, Nordin Shahrina Md, Rahman I, Noor A. The effects IEEE, 2012. of knowledge transfer on farmers decision making toward sus- 28. Dey AK. Understanding and using context. Person Ubiquit Com- tainable agriculture practices. World J Sci Technol Sustain Dev. put. 2001;5(1):4–7. 2018. 29. Eagle N, Pentland AS. Reality mining: sensing complex social 6. Agrawal R, Gehrke J, Gunopulos D, Raghavan P. Automatic systems. Person Ubiquit Comput. 2006;10(4):255–68. subspace clustering of high dimensional data for data mining 30. Essien A, Petrounias I, Sampaio P, Sampaio S. Improving urban applications. In: Proceedings of the 1998 ACM SIGMOD inter- traffic speed prediction using data source fusion and deep learn- national conference on Management of data. 1998; 94–105 ing. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data and 7. Agrawal R, Imieliński T, Swami A. Mining association rules Smart Computing (BigComp). IEEE. 2019: 1–8. . between sets of items in large databases. In: ACM SIGMOD 31. Essien A, Petrounias I, Sampaio P, Sampaio S. A deep-learning Record. ACM. 1993;22: 207–216 model for urban traffic flow prediction with traffic events mined 8. Agrawal R, Gehrke J, Gunopulos D, Raghavan P. Fast algorithms from twitter. In: World Wide Web, 2020: 1–24 . for mining association rules. In: Proceedings of the International 32. Ester M, Kriegel H-P, Sander J, Xiaowei X, et al. A density-based Joint Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Santiago Chile. algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with 1994; 1215: 487–499. noise. Kdd. 1996;96:226–31. 9. Aha DW, Kibler D, Albert M. Instance-based learning algo- 33. Fatima M, Pasha M, et al. Survey of machine learning algorithms rithms. Mach Learn. 1991;6(1):37–66. for disease diagnostic. J Intell Learn Syst Appl. 2017;9(01):1. 10. Alakus TB, Turkoglu I. Comparison of deep learning approaches 34. Flach PA, Lachiche N. Confirmation-guided discovery of first- to predict covid-19 infection. Chaos Solit Fract. 2020;140: order rules with tertius. Mach Learn. 2001;42(1–2):61–95. 11. Amit Y, Geman D. Shape quantization and recognition with ran- 35. Freund Y, Schapire RE, et al. Experiments with a new boosting domized trees. Neural Comput. 1997;9(7):1545–88. algorithm. In: Icml, Citeseer. 1996; 96: 148–156 SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 19 of 21 160 36. Fujiyoshi H, Hirakawa T, Yamashita T. Deep learning-based data. In: 2018 Fourth International Conference on Computing image recognition for autonomous driving. IATSS Res. Communication Control and Automation (ICCUBEA), IEEE. 2019;43(4):244–52. 2018; 1–6 37. Fukunaga K, Hostetler L. The estimation of the gradient of a 58. Kohonen T. The self-organizing map. Proc IEEE. density function, with applications in pattern recognition. IEEE 1990;78(9):1464–80. Trans Inform Theory. 1975;21(1):32–40. 59. Koroniotis N, Moustafa N, Sitnikova E, Turnbull B. Towards the 38. Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A, Bengio Y. Deep learning. development of realistic botnet dataset in the internet of things Cambridge: MIT Press; 2016. for network forensic analytics: bot-iot dataset. Fut Gen Comput 39. Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley Syst. 2019;100:779–96. D, Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y. Generative adversarial nets. 60. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE. Imagenet classification In: Advances in neural information processing systems. 2014: with deep convolutional neural networks. In: Advances in neural 2672–2680. information processing systems, 2012: 1097–1105 40. Guerrero-Ibáñez J, Zeadally S, Contreras-Castillo J. Sensor 61. Kushwaha S, Bahl S, Bagha AK, Parmar KS, Javaid M, Haleem technologies for intelligent transportation systems. Sensors. A, Singh RP. Significant applications of machine learning for 2018;18(4):1212. covid-19 pandemic. J Ind Integr Manag. 2020;5(4). 41. Han J, Pei J, Kamber M. Data mining: concepts and techniques. 62. Lade P, Ghosh R, Srinivasan S. Manufacturing analytics and Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2011. industrial internet of things. IEEE Intell Syst. 2017;32(3):74–9. 42. Han J, Pei J, Yin Y. Mining frequent patterns without candidate 63. Lalmuanawma S, Hussain J, Chhakchhuak L. Applications of generation. In: ACM Sigmod Record, ACM. 2000;29: 1–12. machine learning and artificial intelligence for covid-19 (sars- 43. Harmon SA, Sanford TH, Sheng X, Turkbey EB, Roth H, cov-2) pandemic: a review. Chaos Sol Fract. 2020:110059 . Ziyue X, Yang D, Myronenko A, Anderson V, Amalou A, et al. 64. LeCessie S, Van Houwelingen JC. Ridge estimators in logistic Artificial intelligence for the detection of covid-19 pneumo- regression. J R Stat Soc Ser C (Appl Stat). 1992;41(1):191–201. nia on chest ct using multinational datasets. Nat Commun. 65. LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, Haffner P. Gradient-based 2020;11(1):1–7. learning applied to document recognition. Proc IEEE. 44. He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J. Spatial pyramid pooling in deep 1998;86(11):2278–324. convolutional networks for visual recognition. IEEE Trans Pat- 66. Liu H, Motoda H. Feature extraction, construction and selection: tern Anal Mach Intell. 2015;37(9):1904–16. A data mining perspective, vol. 453. Springer Science & Busi- 45. He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J. Deep residual learning for image ness Media; 1998. recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer 67. López G, Quesada L, Guerrero LA. Alexa vs. siri vs. cortana vision and pattern recognition, 2016: 770–778. vs. google assistant: a comparison of speech-based natural user 46. Hinton GE. A practical guide to training restricted boltzmann interfaces. In: International Conference on Applied Human Fac- machines. In: Neural networks: Tricks of the trade. Springer. tors and Ergonomics, Springer. 2017; 241–250. 2012; 599-619 68. Liu B, HsuW, Ma Y. Integrating classification and association 47. Holte RC. Very simple classification rules perform well on most rule mining. In: Proceedings of the fourth international confer- commonly used datasets. Mach Learn. 1993;11(1):63–90. ence on knowledge discovery and data mining, 1998. 48. Hotelling H. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into 69. MacQueen J, et al. Some methods for classification and anal- principal components. J Edu Psychol. 1933;24(6):417. ysis of multivariate observations. In: Proceedings of the fifth 49. Houtsma M, Swami A. Set-oriented mining for association rules Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, in relational databases. In: Data Engineering, 1995. Proceedings 1967;volume 1, pages 281–297. Oakland, CA, USA. of the Eleventh International Conference on, IEEE.1995:25–33. 70. Mahdavinejad MS, Rezvan M, Barekatain M, Adibi P, Barnaghi 50. Jamshidi M, Lalbakhsh A, Talla J, Peroutka Z, Hadjilooei P, Sheth AP. Machine learning for internet of things data analy- F, Lalbakhsh P, Jamshidi M, La Spada L, Mirmozafari M, sis: a survey. Digit Commun Netw. 2018;4(3):161–75. Dehghani M, et al. Artificial intelligence and covid-19: deep 71. Marchand A, Marx P. Automated product recommendations with learning approaches for diagnosis and treatment. IEEE Access. preference-based explanations. J Retail. 2020;96(3):328–43. 2020;8:109581–95. 72. McCallum A. Information extraction: distilling structured data 51. John GH, Langley P. Estimating continuous distributions in from unstructured text. Queue. 2005;3(9):48–57. bayesian classifiers. In: Proceedings of the Eleventh conference 73. Mehrotra A, Hendley R, Musolesi M. Prefminer: mining user’s on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann Pub- preferences for intelligent mobile notification management. In: lishers Inc. 1995; 338–345 Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Pervasive 52. Kaelbling LP, Littman ML, Moore AW. Reinforcement learning: and Ubiquitous Computing, Heidelberg, Germany, 12–16 Sep- a survey. J Artif Intell Res. 1996;4:237–85. tember, 2016; pp. 1223–1234. ACM, New York, USA. . 53. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Gawankar SA. Sustainable industry 74. Mohamadou Y, Halidou A, Kapen PT. A review of mathemati- 4.0 framework: a systematic literature review identifying the cur- cal modeling, artificial intelligence and datasets used in the rent trends and future perspectives. Process Saf Environ Protect. study, prediction and management of covid-19. Appl Intell. 2018;117:408–25. 2020;50(11):3913–25. 54. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Gawankar SA. Achieving sus- 75. Mohammed M, Khan MB, Bashier Mohammed BE. Machine tainable performance in a data-driven agriculture supply learning: algorithms and applications. CRC Press; 2016. chain: a review for research and applications. Int J Prod Econ. 76. Moustafa N, Slay J. Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for 2020;219:179–94. network intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data 55. Kaufman L, Rousseeuw PJ. Finding groups in data: an introduc- set). In: 2015 military communications and information systems tion to cluster analysis, vol. 344. John Wiley & Sons; 2009. conference (MilCIS), 2015;pages 1–6. IEEE . 56. Keerthi SS, Shevade SK, Bhattacharyya C, Radha Krishna MK. 77. Nilashi M, Ibrahim OB, Ahmadi H, Shahmoradi L. An analyti- Improvements to platt’s smo algorithm for svm classifier design. cal method for diseases prediction using machine learning tech- Neural Comput. 2001;13(3):637–49. niques. Comput Chem Eng. 2017;106:212–23. 57. Khadse V, Mahalle PN, Biraris SV. An empirical comparison of supervised machine learning algorithms for internet of things SN Computer Science
160 Page 20 of 21 SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 78. Yujin O, Park S, Ye JC. Deep learning covid-19 features on of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive cxr using limited training data sets. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. and Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp): Adjunct, Germany, pages 2020;39(8):2688–700. 630–634. ACM, 2016. 79. Otter DW, Medina JR , Kalita JK. A survey of the usages of 102. Sarker IH, Colman A, Kabir MA, Han J. Individualized time- deep learning for natural language processing. IEEE Trans Neu- series segmentation for mining mobile phone user behavior. ral Netw Learn Syst. 2020. Comput J Oxf Univ UK. 2018;61(3):349–68. 80. Park H-S, Jun C-H. A simple and fast algorithm for k-medoids 103. Sarker IH, Hoque MM, MdK Uddin, Tawfeeq A. Mobile data clustering. Expert Syst Appl. 2009;36(2):3336–41. science and intelligent apps: concepts, ai-based modeling and 81. Liii Pearson K. on lines and planes of closest fit to systems research directions. Mob Netw Appl, pages 1–19, 2020. of points in space. Lond Edinb Dublin Philos Mag J Sci. 104. Sarker IH, Kayes ASM. Abc-ruleminer: user behavioral rule- 1901;2(11):559–72. based machine learning method for context-aware intelligent 82. Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, services. J Netw Comput Appl. 2020; page 102762 Grisel O, Blondel M, Prettenhofer P, Weiss R, Dubourg V, et al. 105. Sarker IH, Kayes ASM, Badsha S, Alqahtani H, Watters P, Ng A. Scikit-learn: machine learning in python. J Mach Learn Res. Cybersecurity data science: an overview from machine learning 2011;12:2825–30. perspective. J Big Data. 2020;7(1):1–29. 83. Perveen S, Shahbaz M, Keshavjee K, Guergachi A. Metabolic 106. Sarker IH, Watters P, Kayes ASM. Effectiveness analy- syndrome and development of diabetes mellitus: predictive sis of machine learning classification models for predicting modeling based on machine learning techniques. IEEE Access. personalized context-aware smartphone usage. J Big Data. 2018;7:1365–75. 2019;6(1):1–28. 84. Santi P, Ram D, Rob C, Nathan E. Behavior-based adaptive call 107. Sarker IH, Salah K. Appspred: predicting context-aware smart- predictor. ACM Trans Auton Adapt Syst. 2011;6(3):21:1–21:28. phone apps using random forest learning. Internet Things. 85. Polydoros AS, Nalpantidis L. Survey of model-based reinforce- 2019;8: ment learning: applications on robotics. J Intell Robot Syst. 108. Scheffer T. Finding association rules that trade support optimally 2017;86(2):153–73. against confidence. Intell Data Anal. 2005;9(4):381–95. 86. Puterman ML. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic 109. Sharma R, Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Kumar V, Kumar A. A dynamic programming. John Wiley & Sons; 2014. systematic literature review on machine learning applications for 87. Quinlan JR. Induction of decision trees. Mach Learn. sustainable agriculture supply chain performance. Comput Oper 1986;1:81–106. Res. 2020;119: 88. Quinlan JR. C4.5: programs for machine learning. Mach Learn. 110. Shengli S, Ling CX. Hybrid cost-sensitive decision tree, knowl- 1993. edge discovery in databases. In: PKDD 2005, Proceedings of 9th 89. Rasmussen C. The infinite gaussian mixture model. Adv Neural European Conference on Principles and Practice of Knowledge Inform Process Syst. 1999;12:554–60. Discovery in Databases. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 90. Ravi K, Ravi V. A survey on opinion mining and sentiment volume 3721, 2005. analysis: tasks, approaches and applications. Knowl Syst. 111. Shorten C, Khoshgoftaar TM, Furht B. Deep learning applica- 2015;89:14–46. tions for covid-19. J Big Data. 2021;8(1):1–54. 91. Rokach L. A survey of clustering algorithms. In: Data mining 112. Gökhan S, Nevin Y. Data analysis in health and big data: a and knowledge discovery handbook, pages 269–298. Springer, machine learning medical diagnosis model based on patients’ 2010. complaints. Commun Stat Theory Methods. 2019;1–10 92. Safdar S, Zafar S, Zafar N, Khan NF. Machine learning based 113. Silver D, Huang A, Maddison CJ, Guez A, Sifre L, Van Den decision support systems (dss) for heart disease diagnosis: a Driessche G, Schrittwieser J, Antonoglou I, Panneershelvam V, review. Artif Intell Rev. 2018;50(4):597–623. Lanctot M, et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural 93. Sarker IH. Context-aware rule learning from smartphone networks and tree search. nature. 2016;529(7587):484–9. data: survey, challenges and future directions. J Big Data. 114. Ślusarczyk B. Industry 4.0: Are we ready? Polish J Manag Stud. 2019;6(1):1–25. 17, 2018. 94. Sarker IH. A machine learning based robust prediction model for 115. Sneath Peter HA. The application of computers to taxonomy. J real-life mobile phone data. Internet Things. 2019;5:180–93. Gen Microbiol. 1957;17(1). 95. Sarker IH. Ai-driven cybersecurity: an overview, security intel- 116. Sorensen T. Method of establishing groups of equal amplitude in ligence modeling and research directions. SN Comput Sci. 2021. plant sociology based on similarity of species. Biol Skr. 1948; 5. 96. Sarker IH. Deep cybersecurity: a comprehensive overview from 117. Srinivasan V, Moghaddam S, Mukherji A. Mobileminer: min- neural network and deep learning perspective. SN Comput Sci. ing your frequent patterns on your phone. In: Proceedings of 2021. the International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous 97. Sarker IH, Abushark YB, Alsolami F, Khan A. Intrudtree: a Computing, Seattle, WA, USA, 13-17 September, pp. 389–400. machine learning based cyber security intrusion detection model. ACM, New York, USA. 2014. Symmetry. 2020;12(5):754. 118. Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, Sermanet P, Reed S, Anguelov D, Erhan 98. Sarker IH, Abushark YB, Khan A. Contextpca: predicting con- D, Vanhoucke V, Rabinovich A. Going deeper with convolutions. text-aware smartphone apps usage based on machine learning In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and techniques. Symmetry. 2020;12(4):499. pattern recognition. 2015; pages 1–9. 99. Sarker IH, Alqahtani H, Alsolami F, Khan A, Abushark YB, 119. Tavallaee M, Bagheri E, Lu W, Ghorbani AA. A detailed analysis Siddiqui MK. Context pre-modeling: an empirical analysis for of the kdd cup 99 data set. In. IEEE symposium on computa- classification based user-centric context-aware predictive mod- tional intelligence for security and defense applications. IEEE. eling. J Big Data. 2020;7(1):1–23. 2009;2009:1–6. 100. Sarker IH, Alan C, Jun H, Khan AI, Abushark YB, Khaled S. 120. Tsagkias M. Tracy HK, Surya K, Vanessa M, de Rijke M. Chal- Behavdt: a behavioral decision tree learning to build user-centric lenges and research opportunities in ecommerce search and rec- context-aware predictive model. Mob Netw Appl. 2019; 1–11. ommendations. In: ACM SIGIR Forum. volume 54. NY, USA: 101. Sarker IH, Colman A, Kabir MA, Han J. Phone call log as a con- ACM New York; 2021. p. 1–23. text source to modeling individual user behavior. In: Proceedings SN Computer Science
SN Computer Science (2021) 2:160 Page 21 of 21 160 121. Wagstaff K, Cardie C, Rogers S, Schrödl S, et al. Constrained diabetes through electronic health records. Int J Med Inform. k-means clustering with background knowledge. Icml. 2017;97:120–7. 2001;1:577–84. 135. Zheng Y, Rajasegarar S, Leckie C. Parking availability predic- 122. Wang W, Yang J, Muntz R, et al. Sting: a statistical information tion for sensor-enabled car parks in smart cities. In: Intelligent grid approach to spatial data mining. VLDB. 1997;97:186–95. Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP), 123. Wei P, Li Y, Zhang Z, Tao H, Li Z, Liu D. An optimization 2015 IEEE Tenth International Conference on. IEEE, 2015; method for intrusion detection classification model based on deep pages 1–6. belief network. IEEE Access. 2019;7:87593–605. 136. Zhu H, Cao H, Chen E, Xiong H, Tian J. Exploiting enriched 124. Weiss K, Khoshgoftaar TM, Wang DD. A survey of transfer contextual information for mobile app classification. In: Proceed- learning. J Big data. 2016;3(1):9. ings of the 21st ACM international conference on Information 125. Witten IH, Frank E. Data Mining: Practical machine learning and knowledge management. ACM, 2012; pages 1617–1621 tools and techniques. Morgan Kaufmann; 2005. 137. Zhu H, Chen E, Xiong H, Kuifei Y, Cao H, Tian J. Mining mobile 126. Witten IH, Frank E, Trigg LE, Hall MA, Holmes G, Cunningham user preferences for personalized context-aware recommenda- SJ. Weka: practical machine learning tools and techniques with tion. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol (TIST). 2014;5(4):58. java implementations. 1999. 138. Zikang H, Yong Y, Guofeng Y, Xinyu Z. Sentiment analysis of 127. Wu C-C, Yen-Liang C, Yi-Hung L, Xiang-Yu Y. Decision tree agricultural product ecommerce review data based on deep learn- induction with a constrained number of leaf nodes. Appl Intell. ing. In: 2020 International Conference on Internet of Things and 2016;45(3):673–85. Intelligent Applications (ITIA), IEEE, 2020; pages 1–7 128. Wu X, Kumar V, Quinlan JR, Ghosh J, Yang Q, Motoda H, 139. Zulkernain S, Madiraju P, Ahamed SI. A context aware interrup- McLachlan GJ, Ng A, Liu B, Philip SY, et al. Top 10 algorithms tion management system for mobile devices. In: Mobile Wire- in data mining. Knowl Inform Syst. 2008;14(1):1–37. less Middleware, Operating Systems, and Applications. Springer. 129. Xin Y, Kong L, Liu Z, Chen Y, Li Y, Zhu H, Gao M, Hou H, 2010; pages 221–234 Wang C. Machine learning and deep learning methods for cyber- 140. Zulkernain S, Madiraju P, Ahamed S, Stamm K. A mobile security. IEEE Access. 2018;6:35365–81. intelligent interruption management system. J UCS. 130. Xu D, Yingjie T. A comprehensive survey of clustering algo- 2010;16(15):2060–80. rithms. Ann Data Sci. 2015;2(2):165–93. 131. Zaki MJ. Scalable algorithms for association mining. IEEE Trans Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to Knowl Data Eng. 2000;12(3):372–90. jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. 132. Zanella A, Bui N, Castellani A, Vangelista L, Zorzi M. Internet of things for smart cities. IEEE Internet Things J. 2014;1(1):22–32. 133. Zhao Q, Bhowmick SS. Association rule mining: a survey. Sin- gapore: Nanyang Technological University; 2003. 134. Zheng T, Xie W, Xu L, He X, Zhang Y, You M, Yang G, Chen Y. A machine learning-based framework to identify type 2 SN Computer Science